Hello, dear listener, and welcome back to Startling Barbara Bain.
The only Space 1999 commentary podcast that's beginning to one that if digging up everything that's ever grown and setting fire to it to produce Bitcoin was such a great idea.
I'm Nathan.
I'm Brendan.
I'm James, and I'm a treacherous space satellite sphincter, expelling noxious matter across an entire galaxy, but soon to be recast as the eponymous hero in Star Trek, the motionless picture.
Oh, my God.
Star Trek, the Motionless Picture.
All right, so this week we are watching series one, episode God knows what.
I'm going to say six.
It's SP 12 in production order.
Yeah.
So this is Voyager's Return by Johnny Byrne, is that right?
That's correct.
Almost.
More of that in a bit.
And I'm going to ask the question that I always ask of at least, well, I know that Brendan has seen it all, and that James saw it mere moments ago, I have no memory of this.
How can you say such?
I know it's crazy, isn't it?
But I don't remember seeing this one as a child.
It's just that your parents took you outside in school holidays.
Whereas I've seen it many times from the mid 70s on.
And how does it?
It is a favourite, yes.
It is a favourite.
Is it well regarded?
It's clean, cut and dried, good tech SF.
Johnny Byrne does know what he's doing, although it isn't actually a Johnny Byrne story.
Ah, yes. ah.
It was written by, shall we go there?
It was written by a lovely young Irish lad called Joe Gannon.
I don't know if we know him from other things.
He does go on Legend of Zelda or...
Law and Order. at heat of the night.
So you've got to remember this is 1974 when it was filmed in August 74 and it took 11 days.
It was on budget and on time.
I love this set though.
It's like going into the David Jones early Commodore 64 department in the early except 10 years after this.
Why is a space probe got a massive air conditioned?
Anyway.
Cockpit.
That's the word.
Thank you.
This one was actually written by a lovely fellow called Joe Gannon, but his concept was that the Voyager Pro arrives within the moon's orbit and comms the elephants into providing technology that enables it to turn itself into a living creature.
Big finish, isn't it?
That's is actually a bit Star Trek, the motionless picture.
Well, it's funny you should say that because there's more parallels as we go on in this exciting and remarkable story and lots to say, and a very pretty cast, including the very 1st appearance of an aged Captain Cremen as the alien instigator.
Captain McCreman.
We will talk more about him when he appears later.
That's Alex Scott as the character of Arcon.
And we did have the very, very pretty Barry Stokes, as Jim Haynes, who is quite pretty.
A lot of substitutions in this as well, but we'll get to that.
So it was a bit of a bit of a rush and there's a lot of changes.
It was one of those mid-season things, quick, get it done.
I think it works really well for that.
And it's because of the cast.
Yeah, I have some criticisms to make.
And we will get there as we go along, but I was really sort of solidly entertained by this and didn't know how it would end up.
And there's a kind of bleak weirdness to space 1999 in series one, which I really, really like, and which is where this episode, I think, lands.
It's kind of brutal, isn't it?
They've spent a lot of time on cold, dusty stages in outer Northumbria with Lawrence Olivier's crew.
You can tell they're all NFT.
If they're not RSC, they're national, sorry, NT, national theatre.
So they're all Larry Olivier's troupe.
Jeremy Kemp has an interesting history, but we'll get to that in a bit.
Yes, I... doing the accent?
Well, I think we know him as Robert Picard. from family in series 4, series 4, episode 2 of Star Trek, the Next Generation.
I think we probably go in.
What do you think?
and start talking about it since you're with us.
The reason we've got a lot to say is it has been a long time since we've been in any of your earplugs.
It has.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Where was the last time I'm trying to remember?
It was a couple of months ago now.
But let's get started in that case.
So I have a word, the key word, I'm going to say it in a minute, and the time after that.
The 2nd time I say it is the time that you, the listener at home, and Richard, sitting just opposite me, poised, poised with his finger, hovering over the button, com lock.
Yes, like the Common button, to press play.
So that word is pancake.
Do you want the pan?
We'll talk more about the Sidons later.
So let's go pancake.
Oh, lovely cold opening.
I really like this because suck that up, Stanley Kubrick.
Oh, lovely, Alan.
So what we get, though, is this mysterious ship, which is going to be the focus of the episode saying all of these things about how we're a peaceful mission we come in peace?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
You know, it's like Discovery, episode one, remember?
You know, that old lie, we come in peace.
And so you get this thing talking about being peaceful and we don't really discover until the final act just exactly how kind of terrible it's been.
Did the Russians make this?
Why is there Cyrillic alphabet on all of the things?
That's very good point.
Well, it was an international station.
And don't forget Commander Gorski just before Kearney.
So he may well have pulled...
So he pulled a few favours.
All of these Roman alphabet.
Yeah, he's an entire team of Lecrasec crew.
God knows where they are on the moon base now.
I think they're actually the ones that you know, tend to get sucked out.
Oh, you think?
Yes.
I thought they might be the ones resting in the solarium.
Like, it does have a really good hook that they recognise this ship.
It has this message of peace and they're terrified by it.
Yes.
It's an excellent hook that makes you say, why, what?
How, you know, even Alan's parting is quivering.
Yeah, yeah, yeah That's really cameras wobbly. a lot.
Oh, hello.
Yeah, it's another one of our ABBA tribute bands, guys.
Awfully pretty.
Another Betty.
I don't think it's great.
Another Betty goes.
No.
Too pretty to lie.
Bang bang, Benny.
I think that magnesium flare's going to hit his cockpit any second.
Oh, yeah, wow, it really is.
Although he actually gets sucked off.
Yes.
He does say the ship is falling apart.
So you do see the plate that the explosion was on, just.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But he actually gets pulled out, so to speak.
Even Helen is saying we should dim the St.
Patrick's light.
It's not a party anymore.
The set is green this week if listening to this in the bath, Colin.
Gorgeous shot of the Voyager probe, and it is the Voyager.
It is.
Yeah, the final voyager is not 100% dissimilar.
I'm startled just hearing that.
Hey, Mandy.
Hi, Pete.
Oh, and they're also very excitingly, this farty probe.
Very excitingly, the main mission scanner that shows the approach of Viga is almost exactly the board of the truly lachrymose space 1999 board game that came out in about 1977.
Well, in fact, that thing is just the thing that's physically there, isn't it?
Like it is the thing.
They haven't projected anything on there.
No, it's just the thing.
You know, like in original Star Trek, where there are all those monitors that just show the same thing every week all the time.
It's that and they've put a dot over it to represent Voyager.
Oh no, this is new.
You only see this in this city.
But it is a physical thing, right?
It is actually a board code.
Yes, it is.
Such a great shot.
Oh, well, I think everything's going to turn out wonderfully.
Yes, for the crew.
There goes your dinky.
Oh, sorry, I'll do my fly up.
Say that again. love the font.
Yeah, no, it's well, it's Futura.
Just as Brendan mentioned his fly.
And how did he crack his parting?
There is nothing in that ship he can bang his head against.
It's all padded.
That's right.
Really, shiny padding. too.
I think you just, I think it's just a hair lacker.
Do you think he slammed his head into one of the control panels?
You can't.
He's strapped in.
Oh yeah, that's true.
He's wearing his seatbelt.
He's some...
His wig tape was...
That must be...
It was a bit too tight.
Yes, I think so.
So, so the Voyager thing, like that prop.
It's not super remarkable, but they have that sort of weird effect on it.
You know, like it's got...
The halo or something like a cloud, which sort of dirties it up.
The queller quiff.
Yes.
But that's Quiff with an eye, dear.
But it makes like it makes a horrible whistling sound.
It's very, Captain...
Is with an eye?
Yeah, yeah.
There are some close-ups of it.
Oh, Paul Morrow?
Massive side parties.
And that's very motive today, doesn't he?
He does. all about him.
And I will confess.
I don't know this myself, but reading up on it.
The idea of a, I think it's a fast neutron drive implies that it's a fusion drive.
This is interesting because Johnny Byrne was a tech head buff.
And this was very well received at the time by the science mags.
Because don't forget, there was nothing else on at the time.
This was the biggest SF series and actually the only one.
So what was it?
You know, all the fantastic journey and all infesting voyage, I should say, and all those American things weren't until 75, 76.
So no, this was this was it.
Pretty much because Apollo program ended by Nixon in 74 due to the oil crisis allegedly.
But yeah, I've got more to tell you about the script origins, if you're interested.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, um, Anyway, Johnny Byrne said, you cost too much, you Irish git.
And so he kind of, they kind of said, look, okay, can we can we push it another way?
So I think Gannon left and then went on to other shows.
But burn added a lot of extra things and extra details that are not in this final cut. sadly enough, the experimental lab.
Have we met Ernst Villa yet?
No, maybe I'll save that one for later.
He's coming.
But it's terribly interesting.
All right. save that one.
I will say, I think in that scene we just had, like, I think I, like many people, and sometimes critical of Prentice Hancock, but I do think he sells there the outrage of, okay, yeah, it's very science-y and very interesting and deadly, can we focus on the deadly pleat?
And we'll find out why later.
There's a character read.
But I actually think the problem is that Victor is behaving like an absolute weirdo.
And Nurse is saying it's got things and we need things.
Well, no, but we don't need things.
It's got photographs of space.
And it is very, I think.
This was pre-internet.
Don't forget they were hungry.
That's it.
I think that he's behaving weirdly out of character.
Medical information?
Yes, I did wonder that. because he's the most looking really emotive Yeah, yeah, yeah.
She's pretty great.
Quite startled.
She's moved through, startled, into perturb.
You're getting the method here, actually, with all of them, aren't you?
It's totally believable.
Well, you see, what I think here, though, is that both Victor and John are behaving like idiots, like they're...
It's kind of an idiot plot, you know, like it's very obvious that, like, what, like, it doesn't sell sufficiently what we get out of this.
And so we just seem to be risking everyone's lives in order to have an episode this week.
Do you know what I mean?
Like if they all said, yeah, actually that's really super deadly and it killed a lot of people.
Let's just keep going.
Then we wouldn't have anything.
Yeah, that's right.
But I, that was the, that for me, I think, is the, yeah, Helena loses it.
And then the greatest piece of side eye from Dr. Russell, possibly in the entire series coming up was in a bit.
Although blinking, you miss it.
It's not well enough sold what they will get. get out of it.
That's the point.
It's been 15 years and it's crossed a galaxy.
What the hell is this thing?
Yeah, it could revolutionise things.
Beef up the dialogue a little.
And here it comes, and she just looks at him and do the side eye that, oh, go fuck yourselves.
Yeah, yeah, well, that's right.
Do you know what I mean?
If someone has an argument...
All right, she says.
We should find all the information we need about fast neutrons.
Okay, it doesn't hang much in that scene, but it's actually, she's just telling them you're boys with toys and you are totally dead shits.
Yeah.
I think that's a problem.
I think it undermines Victor's character because remember Victor is very humane and very sensible and like just having him go all shiny space thing at the risk of everyone's life just doesn't seem like him.
You know what?
I think if they...
If they had have made it, that was like the 1st week in India. that I spent.
Were you building model rockets?
with Sawyer's palms for you, because that's what most of that's made out of.
Rod and I actually both got food poisoning on our 1st night in the UK when we went last year.
But no, I was going to say on that idea of an extra line of dialogue to explain it.
If it had have been, Voyager was designed to seek out planet suitable for terraforming.
Yeah, new civilisation.
They do.
There's a little bit of that sort of dialogue there too, which I think is interesting.
It was a lot more original.
I think it's looking over at shoulder at Star Trek in some way and being a much bleaker, a nastier version of that, you know?
It's one of the tomorrow people behind him.
So that's Barry Stokes.
He's pretty, isn't he?
He is pretty. entirely convinced by his acting ability, but he's pretty.
Yeah, that's I don't care.
I don't think he's convincing.
It's one of the many models that populates mood-based alpha, as if it had been set up by Drax.
Now, I mean, the thing is, like, we will find out later in the episode that he has a similar motivation to Paul.
So not for the 1st time in space 1999.
I'm asking, why is this not being given to a regular cast member?
And instead it's one of the guests of the week?
Because we've already got a guest of the week, in the form of Renée.
No, he's not Renee Picard, is he?
He's Robert.
Robert Picard.
I'm sorry.
They both die in the fire.
They both, yeah, horribly. horribly, horribly horribly.
But yes, it would have had more weight.
Yeah, if it was Paul.
If it had been Paul.
And yeah, they get the same scene.
Yeah, except it's Paul, remember the, remember the thing that Paul isn't much better if he's in it a bit less.
No, that it's an apprentice Hancock principle.
He's actually quite good if he's not in it very much.
I would, I would counter that with, like, Planet of the Daleks would be much poorer with less, with less some...
Okay, I've got to admit, I've had that as a KPI.
Have you have you been Hancocking enough?
miss all this body language until later in the episode when you see why he has this body language with the professor wandering around looking incredibly uncomfortable and guilty and shifty in the background.
Yes.
He's got a big sort of shifty jacket that he can kind of...
It's like he's going to streak through it.
Flash them.
It's like he's pregnant Gates McFadden.
Yes.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaking of Star Trek.
I think there's two, ironically, Voyager episodes that pick up on the themes of this story very well.
Friendship one, which is the very later Voyager episode where they realise, oh, wait, we didn't kill Carey earlier on.
We can have him back.
We'll kill him then.
But also Dreadnaught.
Yeah, very good Balana Torus episode.
But I mean, so this guy, so he always plays Europeans.
He's not, though, is he?
He's just an English guy.
He's proper English.
Yeah, yeah.
And so, and this is very weird.
I mean, it is very clearly he's like a Nazi rocket scientist or something like that.
This is what we're doing.
That's why we're giving him that accent.
It is a little bit Disney, isn't it?
But there's a little bit reach for the stars.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But, I mean, he even says, you know, I have designed the Kefella Drive because he's German instead of I designed the Keller Drive.
Oh, I didn't pick up on that.
Yeah, yeah, that's interesting.
I'm having this conversation at you.
Yes, his syntax is very...
That tense, yeah.
Oh, isn't that lovely?
Oh, we get to see...
Yes, Dr. Hottie. for a while.
Yeah, lovely Carno's got some dialogue.
Delightful car.
It always surprises me how intense.
Uh, his eyes are.
Who's that?
Um, Carno?
No, no, Captain.
Oh, oh, Martin Landau.
It's the Strasbourg School of...
You must own the scene.
And he said, most of that is actually just the emotion and it doesn't come out.
So they feel everything and then they metre it before they speak.
I think it's actually a very powerful way of performing and Prentice could have taken a tip or two.
But he is still our old mate.
And I actually think, of all of them, Nick Tate gets it really right in the balance, and it might just be because he's proper Australian, but he doesn't put too much in.
Yet I find, again, like his reaction shot there, I really believe everything Alan Carter gives on the screen.
Yeah, I just think, actually Helena as well.
Sorry to interrupt.
No, no, no, she's just remarkable.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
She's great.
He's to act at.
I mean, this is a proper scene where they all have different ideas and stuff.
And again, you know, like everyone is actually being honest, Victor is there saying, I can't guarantee that he's going to be able to turn the koala drive off.
And then when we go and ask Kuela, who is just mysteriously loitering outside the fucking door.
Like, is he listening?
He should have stumbled and had a glass in his ear.
He's who you might win if you get the final puzzle on wheel of forward.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
And then can you shut it down?
He goes, ah, well, I'm not sure that I can, you know, and we just go, oh, well, whatever. lets do it.
Yeah, you know.
Yeah, it's, I mean, it's a thing with acting that, I think, especially in the kind of sci-fi we love that some actors forget that after they've done their line, they need to continue acting.
And I'm not trying to be bitchy when I say that, but it means you need to keep up the facial expression.
It means you need to react not as if you're waiting for your next line, but as your character would react finding out this information.
And I think some actors just don't get that and most of the cast in this do, which I think is rather lovely.
And it's probably a factor of the fact that we are shooting this in the UK with an American sensibility, but with British techniques.
Yeah, and British, I would actually say British sensibilities.
But I think you're right, James, about Landau's eyes, and it is just partly the way the film picks up how blue they are.
Like, they're so, it's...
Yeah, the blueness and what he's doing with them.
Just is captivating.
Oh, no, I think he's magnificent.
He wins an Oscar, doesn't he, for crimes and misdemeanours?
Yeah, you're right, yeah.
Are you talking about land out?
Yeah, he's also up for, of all things for, um, for the, oh, God, I'm getting old.
Ed Edward?
Ed Woods.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Okay, yeah. for Bella Legosi.
He's just perfect.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Lando is really, really gorgeous in this.
He is completely believable.
Yeah.
The way they linger on their on their reactions as well.
Oh, I should mention the director before we get to the quality.
Who is it?
Well, it's a bloke, of course, because they're always blokes and his name's Bob Kellett.
But it was actually meant to be David Tomlin.
Now, David Tomlin was pretty much the assistant guy who created UFO.
I didn't want the directing, but more interestingly, he was Patrick McGuin's co-creator and director for the prisoner.
Wow, okay.
Very creative man.
He was very busy.
So we got this bloke who had just made.
Are you ready?
Very similar sequences, such as up Pompeii, up the chastity, up the front, the Alf Garnet saga.
And don't just lie there, matron, say something.
But I mean, I think see the parallel.
Quella was all over Jim in that last scene.
Well, hello, Jim.
Well, I mean, he's actually a lovely actor who had a really great career.
The bloke who's playing our gym.
Barry Bo quite a lot.
Yes, the R is silent.
I'd like to talk about the lab, if we may.
My brain just went...
I'm surprised.
I'm surprised Dr. Queller survived the Nazi regime.
Or indeed, Jim's outburst.
So this is the experimental lab, but in the in the proper script where they both work.
It's called the exotic research facility.
How about that?
Oh, yes.
I can just see Peacock Finn.
The whole kind of Trixie Mattel, kind of, just a whole lot. just glam up, boys.
But no, the exotic.
This research involved laser and light frequency experiments at the time of this episode was shot and then they shifted to the development of innovative, propulsion, propulsion, I should say, an ultimate, automatic handling devices.
So Comlocks.
But their community. that lab that the people who are in it were actually wiped out when Voyager 2's quello drive cut in too soon when it launched from the base prior to Minbase Alpha.
I did wonder because we are we are told that, but we're not told what it was doing over a populated area anyway.
Yeah, yes.
Well, it was 1985.
So, God, I remember it.
Yeah, that's right.
There were no rules back then.
It was just entire, you know, neoliberalism. anything you could make money out of.
Yeah, Voyager 2 was on a skateboard without a helmet and elbow, as it was pure anarchy.
How did that go, that neoliberalism?
Yeah, no, it's going great.
We're doing it now.
I love this.
It's like they've got Aurac.
In fact, that, I mean, you can buy those bulbs at IKEA.
But, but, I mean, this is, what is it now?
But it's clearly a thing because that's exactly what the lab looked like last time on Ultima Thule.
You know, like it was just big, you know, big lights joined together with lots of Y's and stuff.
I love it.
And eventually they build a whole thing that looks like there should be rats running around inside it, except that it would, they'd be on fire.
You know, James, picking up on what you said of whether Ernst Queller would have survived the regime with his evident proclivities.
I just remembered the head of the SA, the precursor to the SS was Ernst Room, who was decidedly either gay or bisexual, and yet was a good mate of Adolf Hitler.
And, well, who won?
Look, someone's left there. left a tonka toy in the corner.
Well, they always do.
Well, he was still the head of the ESA.
Oh, and one of the good homosexuals for the knights.
Adolf.
Yes.
And boys, it's ready for party launch.
Did you see that Moe?
I know.
I know that guy.
Holy crap.
Oh, my God.
I have to wonder if the name Ernst was perhaps a... to Mr. Rule.
I think it very well could have been.
And Brendan, that's actually quite interesting, yeah.
Well, I did work on the critically noticed a documentary series.
I've basically noticed.
Hitler's secret sex life.
Was that late and renamed the Queller drive?
I don't know, but it's something we could make in COVID with talking heads and a lot of stock footage.
Right.
And as Rodwood put it a hell of a lot of butter.
Oh, look, the Mercano sets out. as well, a couple Mikano happening?
I wish they would clean up these fucking labs, though.
Anyway, it's a whole thing.
They're busy.
Kemp is extraordinary in this, isn't he?
There's no indication of his previous roles.
He was a bit of a matinee idol.
He just did a lot of good standard stuff, but he played against Olivier in the BBC King Lear of 83.
Do you remember that one?
I watched them all when we were at school.
Not the season of Shakespeare.
No, it was actually the BBC film version.
Oh, okay.
Lala Waters Cordelia, I think.
Or Reagan.
Really?
She's one of those.
No, that's interesting because I think it's the same one where Diana Rigg played Reagan.
Oh.
Yes, I think you're right.
And I think Lala War was Cordelia.
Ah, she's the good one.
Although...
Okay.
Yeah, it was a long time.
I could be wrong.
And look, but it is a long time ago.
Maybe she played it on stage at the same time.
No, no, you're right.
You're right.
So they've managed to get it to land, right?
Well, they've managed to set up something so they can bypass the security protocol. so that they can get it to switch off the Queller Drive and just land by normal rockets.
Yeah, they've clicked reset password.
And now they're going to call the person and say, I'm such and such your Facebook friend.
I'm going to send you a code to get access to my account.
I thought they might have stuck, like, unfolded a paper clip and stuck it in the hole.
They put too much air in the balloon.
I don't know.
If I was, if I was Barry, I wouldn't be standing like that because I would get, I would very definitely be getting Quellers and on my bomb.
Like, there's no way that that's not happening.
He was Cornwall in the Lair.
That's what they call a hard reset.
It certainly was. felt it just then.
He's also in the Winter's Tale playing Leontes.
I did love those early 80s, BBC Shakespeare.
They were much better than the stuff we had to do at school.
Isn't Jim Haynes pretty?
Yes.
What a lovely, pretty fresh thing.
And here again, I don't buy how he realises so quickly that he must be quail up.
Well, he's a clever boy.
I think the episode just wants that to happen at this point.
And this confrontation doesn't go anywhere.
Like he's kind of okay with Queller after this.
Like, I think we want that, but I think it needs to be, it needs to be.
Well, man, like it kind of goes somewhere where he gets electrocuted.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's it.
But then, but then, you know, like Jim's okay and now he feels slightly. bad about electrocuting his boss.
And there's a hand.
There's a hand.
Oh, there's a hand.
There's a hand reaching over and I think it's to stop the smoke coming out.
So when we zoom in on the screen. hold the cushion.
Yes.
Yeah, see that.
Yeah, I saw it last night and then, but Rod gets really annoyed if I stop...
So I had to rewind.
Oh, okay.
At the end, at the end, I went.
And I just paused the screen. said, look, he said, no.
Just tell me.
Tell me.
I said lower left hand corner.
He's like, tell me.
He's been blown over the other side of the road.
It's not his hand.
No, it's an it's a it's a prop hand.
His Bob.
Bob needs to be in the show more, I think.
Whenever he's not there, everyone needs to be asking where's Bob?
I do like how he has lasting damage from that.
It's not just, oh, I got an electric shock.
Yeah.
He has broken ribs.
He's got a, what, dislocated shoulder.
Yes, yes.
Yeah.
And, you know, the shoulder's probably been popped back into place, but it still hurts.
So he's struggling for the rest of the episode.
Yeah, yeah.
But, you know, like it's sort of, it's his past.
Do you know what I mean?
Like he comes injured, I think.
Yes, yes.
Those eyes again, see?
Well, follow you around the room.
They do.
And, you know, I think they've even they've even thought about with Martin Landau putting his colour in dark blue to complement but not compete with the eyes.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
You know, if they put him in red or orange, it would have dulled the eyes if they put him in the same colour blue.
It would have competed.
But giving that him that sort of dark gray blue.
Yeah.
Kind of.
Is it royal purple?
Is it a kind of...
He's not, he's more of a middle manager, isn't he?
Oh, but here we have the nasty wasps of doing this.
These are great, too, aren't they?
they gorgeous?
So what did we have?
We had the hawks. a couple of weeks ago.
Not dissimilar. correct.
Now we have the Hornets of Doom.
They are hornets.
I think they're really great.
And I think this is where the episode really takes off.
It really does.
Because, of course, we have the delicious and delightful, what's his face?
Arcon.
No, it's actually 2 A's, R.
It's like Aaron.
Sylvester McCoy, yeah.
Yeah.
Oh, no.
The intransigent chief justifer.
You have to use your gag flex.
Justify.
I really like...
And grudge holder.
Yeah, yeah, grudge holder.
But I think fair enough.
We wiped out 2 of their fucking planets.
It's not like he's overreacting.
He's only going to go and destroy one planet in revenge.
It's very frustrating. though.
Well, he's the, he is indeed from the, from the federated worlds of side on.
And I don't know about you guys, but Sidon has never really been enough for me.
Another Zelda link, though.
Yes, exactly.
Where Link's hot fish, not boyfriend, is Prince Sidon.
Yeah.
Who didn't end well either, did it?
8 foot tall with abs.
And then in the 2nd game, suddenly has a lady fiancé, I don't think so, dear.
He does wink a lot at the camera.
Yes, yeah.
But I mean, Sidon is where Queen Dido comes from originally and she gets called Sidonian Dido in the Aeneid quite a lot.
I think it's just being chosen as a space name by someone who has a vague classical education, probably.
But yes.
Yeah.
I would also like to praise that scene we just have with Barbara Bain with Russell giving him a bit more sedative because she's performing it like I really fucking hate you, but also I'm a doctor and looking after you.
And then when the machine starts working, she actually she's actually a little bit happy for him and then catches herself.
Yeah.
Sorry for the beeps.
Alex Scott, I should say, the Arcon is Australian.
And sadly, we can't interview him.
He died in Turak in 2015, but he's a Melbourne lad.
Wow, okay.
Listen for the accent, Charlotte.
Crowns trap.
And Avengers fans may recognise him from several Avengers.
Oh really?
Not from the one he was in in season one because that's one of the ones that doesn't exist.
Didn't know he was in season one.
He's in Danger Man and the Saint as well.
And of course, the Avengers.
They just really sell this Voyager ship as something that's filthy.
Like, it's about, like, it's like an East Berlin party.
It's that haze.
It's the sound.
It's the shit. the liquid shit coming out of the night.
I mean, honestly, it's no wonder the crew is a specialist for the cleanup.
I mean, really.
And he is pretty much up for it, baby.
But that's us.
Do you know what I mean?
That's what humanity sends out into the world is this filthy thing that claims to be coming in peace and that just wipes your planet out.
It's really bleak and kind of nihilistic and it only really becomes clear, you know, once Archon sort of turns up and tells us what's been happening.
You're right that it's also a nod to, well, if not Oppenheimer, but then the entire Manhattan project team.
There's quite a lovely.
Johnny Byrne is, turns out, well, I mean, you know, Prentice Hancock compared it to being, you know, hit by a nuclear blast and much worse than that.
But 50, what?
What is it, 50 metres under concrete and a lead box?
Yeah, and you'd still be burnt up?
Yeah.
Yeah, it's a foul thing that we've sent out into the world.
And so I'm not entirely convinced by the decision that gets made at the end, and it's the obvious decision that has to be made, but it's not entirely entirely clear that Archon is wrong to want to wipe the planet out.
It's not wrong.
No, no.
Yeah.
And yeah, I think I think it's set up that nobody's wrong.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Also, you know, you hope they will accept Kruella as the sacrifice.
But he's just some asshole. you know what I mean?
Like, like, for that behaviour.
But they don't accept it and then he kills them.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
It's not a, it's, it's not a positive ending.
No, and because they actually wins because we're arsehole.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Like they say, like Quaila says, well, you are bad guys because you want to have revenge and we don't think you're, you know, like a civilised society or something like that.
But exactly right.
Then we just kill them.
We just say, well, you're bad guys, we're going to kill you.
Who's learnt anything?
Yeah, yeah, that's right.
And so that's what we bring into the galaxy.
That's what that's the effect that humanity has on the galaxy.
No, we don't.
We don't deserve this set and it will be gone in about 18 episodes time.
They really do look like they're going to get you in the bum, don't they?
I'll give you too many times you'll die.
I should be so lucky. of Keith Wilson's original set.
See the orange and the red?
Yeah, an original design and a little of it was built in, oh, they've put the gels in.
But yeah, alpha was orange and red and rooms were also green and orange.
Because I think this set is beautiful.
Isn't it the inside the voyager?
We are inside the voyage.
Yeah, yeah.
And also, I think we're going to see it in Dragon's domain.
Yes.
Oh, yeah. tended to.
Well, it makes fair enough too.
I also love that they've gone a little bit as techie and a little bit sunmakers a little bit.
What were they doing at the BBC in a couple of years time?
It's better than anything we've seen on anyone?
It's far better than Trek and Trek.
Okay, Trek was 7 years before and on a much smaller budget.
This is actually kind of believable.
It's beautiful, isn't it?
In fact, it's sort of glamorous.
It's more like, we've talked about the way that you get, you know, these strange spaces that people inhabit, like what's a face, um, uh, the woman, Ilza Blair?
No, that's true.
She was a terrarium for the previous movie.
Oh, the older lady.
The older lady.
Oh, yes, of course, yeah.
You know, those beautiful, beautiful, incredible sets.
Here, you know, this is sold as an earth set.
It's got like warning signs on it and stuff like that and little notes and things. but it looks tags.
They tagged it.
And it is, yeah, that's right, but it is also kind of convincingly of a piece with the design in moves to-based alcohol. massively huge.
And it's ludicrous. oxygenated.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
It's like, where was the crew ever going to...
Oh, actually, no, they did tests.
And, you know, everyone loves a camper.
But I mean, isn't this a probe that just goes out into the thing?
Yes.
So it's attached to the moon base that they could pump oxygen into it.
But it does have chairs and stuff and rooms where you can walk.
It's designed for a crew.
Yeah.
It doesn't mean it had the oxygen in the entire time.
Yeah, yeah.
I'm just getting a lovely sort of if Blake 7 had had a bit more money each.
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
I mean, yeah, that's the whole floor with the BBC model of, we're not going to fund things based on the need of the story.
We're going to fund things based on the fact that this is a 50 minute drama.
Yes.
So the Anedin line gets the same as Blake 7.
And the still of this guy has just appeared.
A photograph of this guy has just appeared to take us out to the break.
We've got a spare budget from dead cars.
Yes.
Voice to the voice of from the past.
Fucking planet.
So yeah, here's Alex Scott, and I had to grab my...
I had to grab my notes, but he has done 3 episodes of the Avengers.
So he's square root of evil in the Avengers, which is a season one episode that no longer exists, but he's also in the classic Too many Christmas trees.
He is, and he's very good in that too.
I keep forgetting it's him because he didn't eat a lot of protein.
And game, which is one of the more fondly remembered Tara King episodes.
Okay.
Looks like a drag queen has been doing his contract.
Yeah, that's the thing. the makeup works when they've sort of applied the darken filter in Photoshop, as we'd call it now, but when it's just him against black drapes, it's just painted shapes on his face.
Yes, it's no Trixie Mattel.
It is that I can imagine him doing an applying my makeup video on YouTube.
Hi, you've destroyed my planet with the Queller drive and now I'm going to wipe you out.
Trixie Mattel.
I did some great films.
See, he worked with Schlesinger, who we love.
Of course, François Truffaut and Lawrence Olivier.
I feel like he was in a bond, but maybe I'm wrong.
No, but blonde versus black Emmanuel.
Is it Sky Pirates?
I loved that.
There you go.
Crap.
And the abominable Dr. Fibes.
He's in Fahrenheit 451.
Okay.
And Darling, the Julie Christie vehicle with...
He, like he's fantastic.
He's basically completely not doing any facial expressions at all this week.
No, he paid.
The beer will fall off.
We're in a lot of slap getting paid.
And, you know, the thing that I like about this too, is that it just absolutely leans into being just the most tedious science fiction bullshit.
All his dialogue.
Do you know what I mean?
The 5 worlds of Sidon, and I'm a decider.
It's absolutely, I'm a Sileuran, and I'm going for my tea break dialogue.
And I don't care.
I think it works really well.
I keep hearing Sidon, as in...
Yeah, no, no, we've done that.
Oh right.
Yes.
Oh, oh, it's spelt with a C wine.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
They're like cylons who are not very good at typing.
But of course, you know, we have to remember this before Battlestar Galactabus.
This is before the motion picture.
And, you know, the actual Voyager Pro one and 2 launched 2 or 3 years after this in 1977.
Oh, okay, yep.
So they were in the planning and consciousness.
They are still going.
I've watched some fascinating videos on YouTube about them.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
A very good channel called Astrom.
So some great space stuff. a word, but that's fine.
I'm sure it's not, but he's got a lovely speaking.
Okay, ghosty dog.
Which is amazing because he's about 22.
And the build of Alex Scott, but he sounds a bit, it's not that.
Those ships are great though, don't they?
They are just absolutely superb.
Find the camera.
Find the camera apprentice.
Yeah, yeah.
No, Nick Tate's like got his nose in front of him.
It's a whole thing.
Yes, everyone is wearing a lot of pancake today, including Queller. and obviously Arcon.
See, this is another one, Brendan, I think, where she's kind of warming to him a little bit because of his vulnerability, and I do love that I'm very upset.
I am very upset because of the 100s of 1000000s of people I killed.
I'm very upset though.
I do like his, I'm off my face on opiates acting.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I think Barbara probably gave you some tips.
Right with her.
You know, it's interesting because anything about sort of nuclear damage recently.
I can't help but think of Godzilla -one.
The 1st Godzilla movie to win a fucking Oscar, for God's sake.
But it, yeah, it's set sort of 7 years after the bombs are dropped on Japan and it's dealing with that.
And it's, and especially sort of it coming out, I think, 8 months after Oppenheimer, it's a really interesting cultural zeitgeisty thing.
And there are elements of how the characters act in that that relate to this as well.
Look at that.
With the bottom of her face covered in darkness and they've been getting on and they've been talking about how he feels and the philosophy of it.
Yeah, I just, I don't know.
Look, I mean, it's clearly about pollution in a way, isn't it, that the fact that that Voyager reads is a dreadful filthy thing.
And you, like, here's the box and it's just like, so that's the memory bank from Voyager, so who gives a shit?
Now these guys are off to destroy our planet.
Was it worth it, you know?
And we never mention it again, obviously.
Yeah, it's like, yeah, this box is what 2 planets died for.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
And what earth?
The 3rd planet is about to die for.
If they just threw it at archons to distract him and it broke.
That would be ironic and that would solve the problem.
That would release the key to time.
The universe would reset.
Yes, quite.
And you know, I was watching this thinking sort of why, you know, why not just make him a Nazi scientist?
But then I thought, this is set in 1999.
The character would at the youngest have to be 75 years old.
And you don't need to do that.
No, no, it works much better as an allegory because we can feel more sympathy for him.
Yeah.
You know, he wasn't part of a horrible regime bent on exterminating certain groups of people.
He was a scientist who fucked up.
No, no, it's just human beings are basically this shit and this is what we do.
Do you know what I mean?
He was just doing his job.
German accent is shorthand.
Yeah, yeah.
Like, because of when it's made for...
I think he's the sort of science that he's supposed to be.
So he's got this pipe, but he's not allowed to light it because...
Okay, this is gonna sound a bit wanky, but I actually think it's a metaphor.
He can never again.
Do the horrible thing he did?
He can never again ignite the Queller drive because of the destruction it causes.
I think the pipe is a metaphor.
So he he carries it with him.
It's his guilt and his history and his shame and he can't light it.
Right, right, right.
Because we see Victor smoking.
Yeah, okay, do we?
Not in this episode, but we have seen Victor smoking cigars in the past.
But yeah, I think I think the pipe is a metaphor, and he holds onto it out of sort of security, even though he can't light it, just like he's holding onto his past.
It's a security blanket.
Yeah.
Like the way he's holding it.
Because yeah, I, I, when I was watching it, and he puts, he puts down the pipe.
When I when I was 1st watching, I'm like, what the hell is up with the pipe?
It's really interesting to, like, and I do think that it really kicks into high gear when the sidens arrive.
But I don't know what he's doing here.
And I think I remember thinking, if he's going up there to kind of wipe them out with a Quella drive, then that's kind of awful.
I think that's, I think we're meant to think that's the last result.
He's going up there to give himself up and to say, here also, here is the thing that caused the destruction.
So you know it'll never happen again and it's still not good enough for them.
Yeah, I read that as he, until the last moment, he's intending to sacrifice himself and then.
Yeah.
I think that's right.
They refuse.
Yeah, and then he uses it on them.
But in a way, it's not a question about Quetus motivations, but about what sort of show this wants to be.
Do you know what I mean?
Like what are they going to make him do?
How are they going to resolve this?
And what?
Yeah, see, what's happening here?
Why does he want to go with him?
Well, I think it's more that he wants to stop him.
Like, he's figured out that what Quell is going to go.
And I think possibly his motivation is murky because he likes Ernst Tiller or whatever his fake name was.
Yeah.
But no, it's Quella... but Ernest Quella killed his parents.
So, yeah.
So it is very clear here, isn't it, that he's going to sacrifice himself.
And so he stops the boy from going with him.
Yeah, it's about ending the cycle of violence.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And that's a kind of resolution of the relationship. in a way where it can't be resolved because his parents are still dead.
Yeah.
And even if they weren't, they beat on Earth, which has been ravaged.
After moon left.
I love the way that this character reacts to that sacrifice, the choice to sacrifice.
He, like the conflict between this man killed my parents and he's going to sacrifice his life to try and save us. is is believable.
Yes.
Yes, absolutely.
Yeah.
And he doesn't report it.
No.
That's the thing.
Coning and everyone else is about to figure it out for themselves.
Jim never comes and tells them.
Yeah.
All right.
It's going to go very well.
What do you think?
Yeah, no, I think this is...
Look, I think the site on seem reasonable.
As Rod pointed out, it really should have been a giant 5 next to danger.
I don't know why there's an 8 there in Voyager one.
Level eight.
Well, there's seven.
Oh, there's seven.
Buck behind his head.
So I think I think it's stations and it is octagonal.
But then 7 should be next to 8.
Well, the whole thing's ruined.
So reassuringly Matt, but there you go.
There's Aurex, great, great, great.
I know it looks great, doesn't it?
I just want to shoot ball bearings through it.
I've just realised who Barry Stokes reminds me of, and it's a young Tim Ferguson.
Oh, okay.
From his, um, Doug Anthony All-Stars, Dave.
Okay.
Even before then.
Yes.
Well, yes, I think I think Tim Ferguson might possibly have been 6 weddings.
Interestingly, it doesn't have an auxiliary drive for takeoff.
There's only the one Space Sphincter.
Yeah, one for and obviously a wire, a fishing line.
Yeah, but he did.
Hello, Sandra, we've missed students.
Yeah, space butts.
Get ready.
Backing up on Moonbase sound, please.
I meet the space butts with alacrity.
You have destroyed 2 bowls of the Sidon Confederation, and the sentences twerking.
I didn't pick up any Australian from our mate born in Ballarat.
No.
I wish we were doing this 10 years ago. phoned a few of them up.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Bit annoying that aren't many left.
No.
Except Barbara.
And we kind of don't want her to know where did we?
Tate is still around.
We could say hello.
He's in the country.
Oh, hello, party time.
Eric Idol, yeah.
I was thinking it's for Gillette.
Is he the best American guy?
don't know.
Sandra has finally got something to say.
Yeah, yeah.
I don't know. make it her parents.
Give her something to be sad about.
Rachelette.
Oh, oh, God, yes, right.
Okay.
Oh, I didn't realise he was wearing spangly disk at that time.
Oh, no, that's him with the disco.
Now he's what could do it from a disco.
Trek original series, isn't it?
Well, I thought he was wearing...
He looked like he was wearing a sequined ball gown before I was thinking.
I think he's definitely hung out with Kenny effort.
I think it is a sequence dress.
Listen to me, queen.
Hey, girl. sequins?
This is gorgeous.
But this is when you realise that they've actually just been in space far too long and not enough protein shakes. so to speak.
And the thing is, Equella here is saying, like, he's acknowledging the suffering, he's and he's saying, punish me, not everyone else.
He is, his 1st option is to say, take me, I take responsibility.
And but and then he starts to attack.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But that is still dreadful.
And it's also like, you know, yes, I know, uh, we'll just get this arsehole who's come up in space and said these things and we'll kill him and then we'll all go home and we just say, yeah, yeah, sorry about those planets of 1000000000s of people.
But we did kill this one guy.
I hope that's okay.
Do you know what I mean?
Like, it's just not like he doesn't have a right to demand that they forgive him after he gives himself up.
And then when when they don't do that, They go, oh, well, you're a morally inferior culture and now I'm going to blow you up with the Queller drive.
It's just a bit rough, I think.
But that's the thing.
Sort of, should Queller then say, okay, if you're not going to accept me, fine blow up alpha.
Oh, no, they're heading to Earth.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
No, that's it.
That's the point.
But but you'd stop being able to say, I'm doing this because I'm morally superior to you.
And so I have the right to kill you all by it's an odd line.
No, no, no.
I think no, no.
I don't think it's got out of their control.
I don't think they're doing anything bad.
I think that what's happening is they're depicting the world in this sort of horrifically bleak way.
Well, it's kill or be killed.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But that's what we bring to the world.
You know, we're not coming in peace.
We not, you know, exploring strange new life forms or whatever.
Where, where, where, um, We're attacking people with Miralon.
We are attacking them with Mariana, apparently.
I do have to say, though, I was seeing this through the prism of 70s space discos, but honestly, he looks like he's been through quite a lot.
I mean, he really does.
Tuesday morning.
He's really...
You're very kind.
I'm saying it. to the game again.
Yeah, when they begin.
Because that's a lot going down right there.
And also, interestingly, I'd like to ask the do listener as well as the other podcasters, if you need 50 metres of concrete and a lead box and you still fry, what the frick is it between the drive and the habitation quarters of the Voyager probe?
Well, it's pointing the other direction.
Oh, no, they, no, they just want to, closing the Venetian blinds.
That's all.
It's pointing in the earth.
His stream is pointing.
It is clearly directional.
I don't know about you.
Trust me, I can tell you.
But I'm in Berlin 4 times and you do get spattered.
No matter how...
Oh, they're going wibbly.
It's adorable.
So everything wiggles.
So the sideons are trough boy.
Who is still alive, by the way?
Urban Myth.
There were two.
Okay, well, one of them was recently interviewed for you, can't say that.
You can't ask that.
And opened with, I'm Draft Boy, and yes, I'm still alive.
One trough boy and one trough man.
I think it was Crossman. right. you're right Oh, no.
You were talking over exploding, exploding bump.
At least we didn't see the plate that...
That's actually a really gorgeous magnesium flare.
It's beautiful, isn't it?
Gorgeously done.
No, Jim.
And you have to smash up Aurac.
And there's one non-incredited person in the background.
Where's Tanya this week?
She's on sabbatical.
Is she?
She must be in the background.
Oh, you know what?
I think she was at the reception desk for the transport tube.
Oh okay.
Yes.
Oh, stop breaking things.
Why is he doing that?
Now, I thought at the beginning, he's deliberately avoiding the globes and then not...
I'm surprised he can cut his hands open on that.
Also, Kano is vicious.
Yeah.
Why?
Yeah, Mikano was vicious.
You could cut yourself on it, couldn't you?
I wouldn't have done that, not for love.
And then you discover he's a different man and he's killed 200000000 people and then and my parents.
And my parents.
It's the same old story.
I have no chin.
Yeah.
No, but we all had hair like that in the 70s.
He did.
I mean, really did.
I really did I have photographic evidence.
Neither did Brendan.
I did.
You know, you know, yes. 70s.
You know what?
I just realised this scene is later mirrored at the end of Curse of Fenrick.
Like I hate my mum, but I love the baby.
Oh my god.
And he doesn't have a, the whole thing fails because he doesn't have any water to dive into.
No.
And so what's happening?
He's learned a valuable lesson about not inventing.
Oh, using the memory bag.
Well, that's the thing.
He's going to take over the good side of Quellin's work. not killing lots of people part of it.
Yeah.
So there are no more dangerous undercurrents.
Okay, good.
Excellent.
Yeah.
But yeah, I still kind of think that should have been Paul.
Because the only kind of thing Prentice has had to do so far is occasionally go nuts.
Again, again.
The Hancock principle.
It really is like emptying a bowel of monkeys, isn't it?
really is.
It really is.
You only say that because they didn't attempt it.
That's right.
If they had attempted it.
You'd be going, why didn't they give Prentice the week off this week?
Why did they make a 2 episodes?
When are we doing the Prentice Hancock podcast?
Oh my god.
The Prentice Hancock principle. whole season of 500 year diary right there.
Just assessing the performance of the Princess Hang to load him, don't we?
We do, over and over again.
Right, right, right.
With John Hamill?
What have you called a complete cock-up?
No, no, it's called the Brenda, Brenda Zankel principle.
Planet of Daleks and Planet of Evil.
Yep.
He was big on Planet.
He was.
Not on this one.
Was that what Doctor Who was doing at the time?
planet of evil?
It's around the season.
Yeah, 74, August 74.
Well, 74 would have been series season 11, season 12.
So he would have he would have come off space 1999 and done Planet Avivo.
Okay.
Apprentice Hancock was in Plant of Evil when like at the same time.
Oh, okay.
What was a broadcast?
This was broadcast about a week or 2 apart from...
Oh, wow.
It was like all the apprentice you could possibly tolerate on television on both fucking channels.
He was inescapable.
You can't get away from it.
None of evil is broadcast in September, October, 1975.
This is broadcast on the 9th of October.
There you go.
What a what a moment.
What a time to be alive.
Well, I can tell you 2 things that don't have Prentice Hancock, and that is the tourist for the PJBJ game show and the beginning of the cool war on the three-handed game with to catch a rat, which features Ian Hendry, but possibly not as the role you're expecting.
And Joanna Lumley inner tights.
You get to see his stocking tops. didn't happen very often.
They bring Ian Hendry back for a later trip. in a different role.
Wow, okay.
Yeah, but the last line of the episode is Steve saying to him, welcome home.
Ah wonderful.
That's awesome.
They knew what they were doing.
Brilliant.
It's lovely episode.
Well, all I can recommend is untitled Star Trek project, which keeps going on and on and on.
Despite any efforts to stop it.
Despite any efforts to stop it, we just...
Please stop them.
That's staying.
It's destroyed 2 planets.
Two whole planets that are still going.
And a lot of side oning.
So next week we will be doing the Devil in the Dark, which is a properly, properly good episode of TOS.
Is that Theodore Sturgeon?
Uh, no.
No?
No, it is.
No, it's Gene Coon.
Oh, right.
Okay.
Yep.
Yeah.
Magnificent.
Really, really good.
Yeah, that's definitely one to keep an eye out for.
All right.
Well, in that case, until next time, remember to switch the light off, whenever you leave a room, it's the only thing that can possibly save us.
Oh, just smash the bulb.
Thank you very much for listening and good night.
Good night.
Ta-ta.
And good thening.